#summary Details of the various releases
#labels Featured

= June 16, 2009 =

[LatentSemanticAnalysis LSA] version 0.1.4

*Changes*:
`lsa.jar`

*Details*

  * Fixed [http://code.google.com/p/airhead-research/issues/detail?id=15 Issue 15] where JAMA wasn't supported for lsa.jar due to a classpath issue


= June 1, 2009 =

[LatentSemanticAnalysis LSA] version 0.1.3

[RandomIndexing] version 0.1.2

*Changes*:
`lsa.jar`
`random-indexing.jar`

*Details*:

  * Added sparse binary and sparse text output option where the resulting .sspace file is much smaller for Random Indexing.  See [FileFormats] for details.  

  * Performance fix for LSA Matlab-to-SVDLIBC matrix conversion path.  Previously, large word-document matrices were loaded into memory for conversion, which resulted in unnecessary `OutOfMemory` exceptions.  The fix does the conversion iteratively, which eliminates the memory bottleneck.


= May 11, 2009 =

[LatentSemanticAnalysis LSA] version 0.1.2

[RandomIndexing] version 0.1.1

*Changes*:
`lsa.jar`
`random-indexing.jar`

*Details*:
  * Added a binary output option where the resulting .sspace file is much smaller.  See [FileFormats] for details
  * LSA matrix operations now clean up the temporary files they generate.

= May 9, 2009 =

[Coals] version 0.1.1

*Changes:*
`coals.jar`

*Details:*
Revised release of Coals, where all rows are saved, and only the column lengths are shortened.

= May 8, 2009 =

[Coals] version 0.1.0

*Changes:*
`coals.jar`

*Details:*
Initial release of Coals.  Release supports configurable word dimensions, svd reduction, and size of svd reduction.  See [Coals Coals] wiki page for full details.

= May 7, 2009 =

[RandomIndexing Random Indexing] version 0.1.0

*Changes:*
`random-indexing.jar`

*Details:*
Initial release of Random Indexing.  Release supports permutatations, configurable dimensions, and index vectors distributions.  See [RandomIndexing Random Indexing] wiki page for full details.

= May 1, 2009 =

[LatentSemanticAnalysis LSA] version 0.1.1

*Changes:*
`lsa.jar` 

*Details:*
Bug fix for an internal conversion between matrix types.  If the user used SVDLIBC, the program would incorrectly covert the format, which resulted in a malformatted S-Space.

= April 27, 2009 =

[LatentSemanticAnalysis LSA] version 0.1.0

*Changes:*
`lsa.jar` 

*Details:*
Initial release of the Latent Semantic Analysis command-line executable .jar file.  Release supports configurable word-document preprocessing and number of dimensions.  The implementation is also highly scalable and multi-threaded.